=== {learning-goals}

// tag::DE[]
// end::DE[]

// tag::EN[]
[[LG-4-1]]
==== LG 4-1: Understanding the basic terms and properties of real-time systems

* The real-time requirements of embedded systems are the result of their
interaction with the environment

* Explain the difference between hard real-time requirements and soft real-time
requirements

* Explain the difference between timeliness and speed

* Understand that generally all actions from the occurrence of a relevant event
to the system reaction must be examined when implementing real-time
requirements: e.g. sensor data read-out, operating system context switch, sensor
data evaluation, actuator control

* When implementing hard real-time requirements, a defined maximum deadline must
be given for each action.


[[LG-4-2]]
==== LG 4-2: Being able to apply a systematic approach to real-time system design

Apply the fundamental approach to real-time architectural design:

* Specify and/or identify external real-time constraints

* Decompose the system behavior into jobs (e.g. identify the needed jobs for
each software module )

* Specify the properties of each job, such as priority, period, WCET

* Decide on a technical solution approach, such as multiple operating system
tasks, cyclic executive, interrupts, or any combination of these

* Allocate jobs to the elements of the technical solution

* Simulate and/or verify the real-time architectural design to ensure that the
external real-time constraints can be met

* Refine the real-time architectural design  (e.g. refine Tasks priorities)

* Provide an estimate of the overall cpu load

* Perform shared resources analysis (e.g. shared variables analysis and
protection using critical sections, which could be protected by semaphores or
disable/enable interrupts)

* Optimize critical sections (e.g. by assigning the functions of modules, which
share the same software resources, in the same RTOS task whenever possible)

* Evaluate Real-Time and Multitasking Software Designs (either by design reviews
or using scheduling simulation and verification tools)

* Consider possible  real-time architectural evolution in the future

Real-time architectural design also encompasses choosing and configuring an
operating system

Real-time architectural design should be performed early on in the project

Participants know:

* Examples of real-time architectural design containing some modules and their
assignation to RTOS tasks


[[LG-4-3]]
==== LG 4-3: Being able to specify and model real-time requirements

* Know different approaches to the specification and modelling of real-time requirements (e.g. specifying real-time requirements in standard UML models, using the MARTE profile, or using domain specific approaches such as TIMMO-2-USE, or AUTOSAR Timing Extensions)

* Are able to select and apply an approach for specifying the real-time requirements of a specific system


[[LG-4-4]]
==== LG 4-4: Understanding time triggered vs. event triggered approaches to real-time architectural design

* Describe time-triggered and event-triggered approaches

* Understand the tradeoffs of time-triggered vs. event-triggered approaches
regarding determinism and flexibility


[[LG-4-5]]
==== LG 4-5: Being able to select adequate technical solutions to concurrency

Can describe the technical solutions cyclic executive, multitasking and
interrupts, and name their strengths and weaknesses

* Know criteria for selecting between different technical solutions

* Can describe how different solution methods can be combined (e.g. cyclic
executive and interrupts)

* Can select a technical solution for a concrete system and reasonably justify
their decision

Cyclic executive:

* Describe the benefits and drawbacks of cyclic executive

* Analyze the real-time characteristics of a solution based on cyclic executive

Multitasking:

* Describe the difference between static and dynamic scheduling methods

* Define preemptive and non-preemptive scheduling methods

* Describe priority-based scheduling

* Understand rate monotonic scheduling and deadline monotonic scheduling

* Name the strengths and weaknesses of the different scheduling methods (static
vs dynamic, preemptive vs non-preemptive)

* Select an appropriate scheduling method according to the real-time
requirements and define the tasks and their characteristics Interrupts:

Interrupts:

* Name the strengths and weaknesses of using interrupts on application level

* Define a concept for using interrupts on application level: prioritizing
interrupts, rules for blocking interrupts, using the prologue/epilogue model

* Understand that the concepts for using interrupts on application level will
generally depend on the processor architecture (e.g. number of priorities).


[[LG-4-6]]
==== LG 4-6: Being able to prevent problems caused by concurrent access to shared resources

* Name potential problems caused by concurrent access to shared resources

* Understand that whether problems due to concurrent access can actually occur
depends strongly on the chosen technical solution to concurrency (e.g.
time-triggered vs. event-triggered approaches)

* Describe and select strategies for preventing typical concurrency problems for
a concrete system (critical sections, semaphores, synchronization objects /
mutexes, atomic actions, non-blocking synchronization)

* Explain how deadlocks occur and show for a concrete system how deadlocks can
be avoided

* Explain priority inversion and show solution methods (priority ceiling,
priority inheritance)


[[LG-4-7]]
==== LG 4-7: Understanding the impact of the operating system on real-time characteristics

* Can explain the characteristics of a real-time operating system

* Understand that real-time operating systems and general-purpose operating
systems serve different purposes.

* Know a minimum of two examples of real-time operating systems including their
characteristics (e.g. QNX, eCos, OSEK OS, uC/OS-II, ...)


[[LG-4-8]]
==== LG 4-8: Understanding solution approaches for interactions between jobs and their tradeoffs

* Define message passing and the shared data as basic approaches to interaction
between jobs and name their consequences

* Analyze the impact of interaction between jobs on real-time behavior

* Define concepts for making interactions compatible with the real-time
requirements of jobs


[[LG-4-9]]
==== LG 4-9: Understanding approaches to real-time analysis

Worst-case execution time:

* Determining the maximum execution time of a job is crucial for real-time
analysis (worst case execution time / WCET).

dependable estimation of the maximum execution time (impact of caches,
* In complex processor architectures, measuring the runtime will not allow for a
pipelines...).

* For certain processors, tools are available that can compute a safe upper
limit for the execution time of a job

* Computing a safe upper limit is only possible for certain processors with
limited complexity. Also, there are limits regarding the tightness of the safe
upper limit.

Schedulability analysis:

* Understanding measurement, simulation and analytical methods as approaches to
real-time analysis

* Understand that the schedulability of a set of tasks cannot be shown in a
dependable way by individual measurements

* Understand that analytical methods such as rate monotonic analysis (RMA) and
deadline monotonic analysis allow for a dependable schedulability analysis

* Can apply rate monotonic analysis (calculate the CPU load of each job and for
the overall system)

* Understand the limitations of analytical approaches regarding complex
real-time systems, due to dependencies between jobs

* Understand simulation as an approach for complex real-time systems


[[LG-4-10]]
==== LG 4-10: Understanding the role of tools for real-time architectural design and –analysis of complex embedded systems

Understand the necessity of tool-support in the design process of complex
real-time systems:

* Understand that for complex embedded systems with a large number of external
real-time constraints, tools for specification, design and analysis of real-time
systems are needed

* Tools for real-time architectural design and –analysis play an important role
in the iterative development of real-time systems: specifying the real-time
requirements, modeling the real-time architectural design, performing a
real-time analysis, and using the results of the real-time analysis to improve
the real-time architectural design.

Tools for design and analysis of real-time systems

* Know application areas of tools for real-time architectural design and
–analysis, such as modeling the real-time architectural design, analytical
schedulability analysis, white-box vs. black-box simulation of real-time systems

* Know examples for specific tools and their application areas (e.g. Inchron,
Timing-Architects, Symtavision) 


[[LG-4-11]]
==== LG 4-11: Understanding the relationship to distributed and multi-core system architectures

* Understand that the scope of real-time architectural design often is beyond a
single-core system

* Distributed and / or multi-core system architectures can be means to fulfill
requirements regarding performance and predictability 


// end::EN[]

